
	DEVELOPMENT OF THE PACKAGE
	--------------------------


        SOURCES OF TABLES

Oh, there are many... I can't remember them all.

Many Unicode tables of character sets, including SGML/HTML entities,
were downloaded from <ftp://ftp.unicode.org/Public/MAPPINGS/>.

Many tables of Polish character sets are based on kravietZ's
<kravietz@pipeta.chemia.pk.edu.pk> Polish charsets converter ConvPL.
The Kamenicky encoding is taken from the Ferdinand Prantl, Jr.'s
<prantl@aip1.fsv.cvut.cz> Czech charsets converter cs2sc.

The algorithm of encoding autodetection is based on kravietZ's Polish
charsets detector QueryPL.

The frequencies of letters in Polish language were computed from JTZ
<http://www.jtz.org.pl/>, the Polish translation of Linux HOWTOs
(1893 kB), Czech - Czech-HOWTO (75 kB), Esperanto -
<http://www.esperanto.mv.ru/> (4708 kB), German and Russian - random
texts in these languages found with Altavista
<http://altavista.digital.com/> (60 kB each).

The frequencies of letters of the following languages were sent by
Gwidon S. Naskrent <naskrent@hoth.amu.edu.pl>: French - Candide,
de Voltaire (190 kB), Italian - La Divina Commedia di Dante (550 kB),
Spanish and Swedish - /usr/dict/*.words from Debian (800 kB each),
Hebrew - Seforim haDivrei from <ftp://ftp.shamash.org/> (140 kB),
Esperanto - Psau^moj from the Zamenhoff's Bible (450 kB).

Many approximations of Unicode letters are based on the glyph pictures
found at <http://charts.unicode.org/charts.html>. Some were also
inspired by Lynx conversion tables.

viscii, viqri, and enhanced cp1258 were taken from Mark Leisher's
<mleisher@crl.nmsu.edu> csets.

mnemonic and mnemonic1 were taken from glibc-2.0.7 sources.


	THANKS

Thanks to Grzegorz Grudzinski <gsg@lipa.mimuw.edu.pl> for spending much
time answering my stupid questions.

Thanks to Gwidon S. Naskrent <naskrent@hoth.amu.edu.pl> for discussions
about charsets, encodings, fonts etc., bug reports, correcting my
English, sending frequencies of letters in some languages, and man
pages.

Thanks to Yann Dirson <ydirson@a2points.com> for discussions, bug
reports, help, and packaging Konwert for Debian.

Thanks to Adam Twardoch <adam.twardoch@euv-frankfurt-o.de> for
discussions about charsets, encodings, fonts etc.

Thanks to Ziemek Borowski <ziembor@FAQ-bot.Ziembor.waw.pl> for help with
packaging Konwert into RPM and pointing out some errors.

Thanks to Juliusz Chroboczek <jec@dcs.ed.ac.uk> for ISO-8859-15,
KOI8-RU, and Mark Leisher's <mleisher@crl.nmsu.edu> csets.

The filterm idea is based on the Piotr Piatkowski's
<kompas@uci.agh.edu.pl> similar program ttyconv aka ogonki
<http://www.agh.edu.pl/ogonki/ttyconv.html>. The pseudo-terminal
handling code is taken from the Linux program script. Also W. Richard
Stevens' "UNIX Network Programming" book helped me.

Thanks to the readers of news:pl.comp.ogonki and news:pl.comp.os.linux
for discussions and help.

Thanks to the authors of Linux, cat, bash, dosemu, gcc, grep, gzip, inn,
less, lynx, make, mc, perl, pine, pppd, rpm, sed, sendmail, sort, suck,
tar, uniq, wget... Life would be much harder without them.


	HOW COULD YOU HELP ME?

You are welcome to send me bug reports, improvements or other
suggestions about trs, scripts, tables and other data - especially
devel/UTF8-charset, devel/UTF8-tex, devel/any and devel/mime.

If you want some new charset supported, please tell me - but only if you
know that this charset is being used or there are texts coded in it.
I have enough tables of hundreds of strange never-seen charsets, but
don't know which of them are usable.

If you want some new language supported by the `any' conversion, please
tell me how can I get the frequencies of its letters (URLs of long texts
in that language are welcome) and what charsets are being used for this
language.


-- 
 __("<   Marcin Kowalczyk * qrczak@knm.org.pl http://qrczak.home.ml.org/
 \__/       GCS/M d- s+:-- a21 C+++>+++$ UL++>++++$ P+++ L++>++++$ E->++
  ^^                W++ N+++ o? K? w(---) O? M- V? PS-- PE++ Y? PGP->+ t
QRCZAK                  5? X- R tv-- b+>++ DI D- G+ e>++++ h! r--%>++ y-
